---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/500-catalog-of-notes/513-web-dev/deno/fresh/getting-started-2-1-2-2/"}
---

- # 2.1 - Create a Project
    - To create a new project, run:
        - ```javascript
deno run -A -r https://fresh.deno.dev my-project
cd my-project
deno task start```
    - This will create a directory containing some files and directories. There are 4 files that are strictly necessary to run a fresh project:
        - **dev.ts**: This is the development entry point for your project. This is the file that you run to start your project. This file doesn't need to be called dev.ts, but this is the convention.
        - **main.ts**: This is the production entry point for your project. It is the file that you link to Deno Deploy. This file doesn't actually need to be main.ts, but this is the convention.
        - **fresh.gen.ts**: This is the manifest file that contains information about your routes and islands. This file is automatically generated in development based on your routes/ and islands/ folders.
        - **import_map.json**: This is an [import map](https://deno.land/manual/linking_to_external_code/import_maps) that is used to manage dependencies for the project. This allows for easy importing and updating of dependencies.
    - A **deno.json** file is also created in the project directory. This file does two things:
        - It tells Deno about the location of the import map, so that it can be loaded automatically.
        - It registers a "start" [task](https://deno.land/manual/tools/task_runner) to run the project without having to type a long deno run command.
    - Two important folders are also created that contain your routes and islands respectively:
        - **routes/**: This folder contains all of the routes in your project. The names of each file in this folder correspond to the path where that page will be accessed. Code inside of this folder is never directly shipped to the client. You'll learn more about how routes work in the next section.
        - **islands/**: This folder contains all of the interactive islands in your project. The name of each file corresponds to the name of the island defined in that file. Code inside of this folder can be run from both client and server. You'll learn more about islands later in this chapter.
    - Finally a **static/** folder is created that contains static files that are automatically served "as is". [Learn more about static files](https://fresh.deno.dev/docs/concepts/static-files).
- # 2.2 - Running Locally
    - To start your server:
        - ```javascript
$ deno task start
Watcher Process started.
Listening on http://localhost:8000```
    - If you want to start manually without Deno task, deno run the main.ts with the appropriate flags. You will need to provide permission flags for:
        - **--allow-net**: This is required to start the HTTP server.
        - **--allow-read**: This is required to read (static) files from disk.
        - **--allow-env**: This is required to read environment variables that can be used to configure your project.
        - **--allow-run**: This is required to shell out to deno and esbuild under the hood during development to do type stripping. In production this is done using a WebAssembly binary.
    - User `--watch` to stay up to date with changes and `--watch=static/` for static file changes
    - You can change the options bag of `start()` in `main.ts` with an explicit port number
        - ```javascript
await start(manifest, { port: 3000 });```
        - Combine it all to get:
            - ```javascript
$ deno run --allow-net --allow-read --allow-env --allow-run --watch=static/,routes/ main.ts
Watcher Process started.
Listening on http://localhost:8000```
- 
